For writing into markdown:
y-hat reference
OSF note
anonymization
chi-squared latex



Long form of abstract:
The development of early word reading skills fundamentally depends on children's interactions with printed words. 
A vast amount of research in the psychological and educational sciences has been conducted on the learning processes
that contribute to skilled word recognition in children and adults. However, little is known about how ensembles of 
words encountered during early learning affect learning outcomes over timescales larger than what can be accomplished 
in a controlled experimental setting. This is for good reason: the types of experimental and inferential methods for 
examining causal effects in this knowledge domain can realistically only happen at small timescales using relatively 
few learning trials of printed words. In order to move past this limitation, and using an established connectionist 
learning architecture (Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996; Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989), we examined 
how variation in word ensembles influence word recognition and generalization during early reading acquisition. Computational 
models simulated learners exposed to different sets of monosyllabic printed words drawn randomly from children’s literature 
at a large scale (*n* = 10,000). In order to examine how different ensembles might impact learning (and generalization) 
depending on the learner's ability to represent the relationship between letters and sounds (a critical skill underpinning
reading development), we also manipulated the representational capacity of models by systematically changing the number 
of hidden units of models, holding the ensemble of words constant. Across levels of representational capacity each model 
(defined as the ensemble of words selected for learning) had twin models which differed only in terms of the number of 
hidden units they possessed. Results demonstrated significant variation in learning outcomes in a set of generalization 
words as a function of the specific word ensemble and number of hidden units. Word recognition accuracy and generalization 
to novel words varied notably with different training sets. Furthermore, representational capacity modulated these 
effects; lower-capacity models exhibited greater variability and poorer performance. These findings indicate that an 
important determinant to learning to read is the nature of the printed word learning environment, and effect that has 
not been found in the behavioral literature in large-scale studies of learning. Additionally, results suggest that special 
consideration should be paid to learners with limited capacity to map printed words to their spoken form, such as those 
with dyslexia, and that ensembles of experiences for such learners should be carefully curated based on their needs. These 
findings inform educational practices by highlighting the importance of deliberate word selection to support early development.